1. The epsilon greedy without importance sampling or without off policy does not perform very good due to these two reasons as far as I could understand:
a) Epsilon greedy takes some random routes while exploration and Q values are updated based on them. This is wrong as in actual Q values should be updated according to the true policy (target policy) which would be a deterministic policy. This is because when we take some action due to exploration or behaviour policy, we forget that this is not the real state distribution but something introduced by us artificially. This causes it to not be able to learn the optimum target policy. Hence when we sample data, we need to make sure to include the factors that what would have hapenned to these results if the target policy was adopted (importance-sampling ratio).

b) Now talking about some dry runs I analysed. Suppose during some iteration(episode) the agent follows S1 -> S2 -> S3 -> S10 -> S11(HOLE) through actions A1, A2, A4, A5 while the current optimum policy was [S1: A1, S2:A2, S3:A3... S10:A5]. In this case, by epsilon greedy (on policy method) we would have chnaged Q (S1,A1) towards some negative value which is unfair as this was never intended by the target policy. We resolve this in off policy method by importance sampling. We not only increase the weight  {1/(1 - e +(e/4)) > 1} of increasing Q values if right action according to polict is taken but we also block the updation of action values like Q(S1,A1) which would have decreased in a negative sense for no reason in current scenario. Hence results are better achieved and in less iterations(episodes) when we apply importance sampling.

e=epsilon

2. If we decrease discount factor to 0.5 then our agent won't be able to differentiate between two results which are reaching the goal in 20-30 steps and just running into the wall as effect of that goal has been discounted so much and along with it there would be some contribution of the negative reward due to probability of running into an hole also. So our agent would prefer running into a wall repeatedly more (especially when reward structure is like (100, -50, 0)). It would loose the farsightedness basically.

3. In the end I chose the reward structure of (100,-50,-2) so that my model can also find the shortest path and not waste more steps which would cause him penalty

4. The value of epsilon was also experimentally choosen to give the best results. If I increase the value of epsilon then my agent might reach NEAR the optimal policy but convergence to the optimal policy is almost impossible or takes too many iterations. I also can't decrease epsilon much as then the initial policy of left action in all states remains unaffected for many states as it is never able to explore and find optimal action value pairs around that state.